## Chapter 7: UNIX System Calls

This chapter concentrates on the lowest level of interaction with the UNIX operating system - the system calls.
These are entries to the kernel.
They *are* the facilities that the operating system provides; everything else is built on top of them.

We will cover several major areas.
First is the I/O system, the foundation beneath library routines like `fopen` and `putc`.
We'll talk more about the file system as well, particularly directories and inodes.
Next comes a discussion of processes - how to run programs from within a program.
After that we will talk about signals and interrupts: what happens when you push the DELETE key, and how to handle that sensibly in a program.

As in Chapter 6, many of our examples are useful programs that were not part of the 7th Edition.
Even if they are not directly helpful to you, you should learn something from reading them, and they might suggest similar tools that you could build for your system.

Full details on the system calls are in Section 2 of the *UNIX Programmer's Manual*; this chapter describes the most important parts, but makes no pretense of completeness.

### 7.1 Low-level I/O

The lowest level of I/O is a direct entry into the operating system.
Your program reads or writes files in chunks of any convenient size.
The kernel buffers your data into chunks that match the peripheral devices, and schedules operations on the devices to optimize their performance over all users.

#### File descriptors

All input and output is done by reading or writing files, because all peripheral devices, even your terminal, are files in the file system.
This means that a single interface handles all communication between a program and peripheral devices.

In the most general case, before reading or writing a file, it is necessary to inform the system of your intent to do so, a process called *opening* the file.
If you are going to write on a file, it may also be necessary to *create* it.
The system checks your right to do so (Does the file exist? Do you have permissions to access it?), and if all is well, returns a non-negative integer called a *file descriptor*.
Whatever I/O is to be done on the file, the file descriptor is used instead of the name to identify the file.
All information about an open file is maintained by the system; your program refers to the file only by the file descriptor.
A `FILE` pointer as discussed in Chapter 6 points to a structure that contains, among other things, the file descriptor; the macro `fileno(fp)` defined in `<stdio.h>` returns the file descriptor.

There are special arrangements to make terminal input and output convenient.
When it is started by the shell, a program inherits three open files, with file descriptors `0`, `1`, and `2`, called the standard input, the standard output, and the standard error.
All of these are by default connected to the terminal, so if a program only reads file descriptor `0` and writes file descriptors `1` and `2`, it can do I/O without having to open files.
If the program opens any other files, they will have file descriptors `3`, `4`, etc.

If I/O is redirected to or from tiles or pipes, the shell changes the default assignments for file descriptors `0` and `1` from the terminal to the named files.
Normally file descriptor `2` remains attached to the terminal, so error messages can go there.
Shell incantations such as `2>filename` and `2>&1` will cause rearrangements of the defaults, but the file assignments are changed by the shell, not by the program.
(The program itself can rearrange these further if it wishes, but this is rare.)

#### File I/O - `read` and `write`

All input and output is done by two system calls, `read` and `write`, which are accessed from C by functions of the same name.
For both, the first argument is a file descriptor.
The second argument is an array of bytes that serves as the data source or destination.
The third argument is the number of bytes to be transferred.
```c
int fd, n, nread, nwritten;
char buf[SIZE];

nread = read(fd, buf, n);
nwritten = write(fd, buf, n);
```
Each call returns a count of the number of bytes transferred.
On reading, the number of bytes returned may be less than the number requested, because fewer than `n` bytes remained to be read.
(When the file is a terminal, `read` normally reads only up to the next newline, which is usually less than what was requested.)
A return value of zero implies end of file, and `-1` indicates an error of some sort.
For writing, the value returned is the number of bytes actually written; an error has occurred if this isn't equal to the number supposed to be written.

While the number of bytes to be read or written is not restricted, the two most common values are 1, which means one character at a time ("unbuffered"), and the size of a block on a disc, most often 512 or 1024 bytes. 
(The parameter `BUFSIZ` in `<stdio.h>` has this value.)

To illustrate, here is a program to copy its input to its output.
Since the input and output can be redirected to any file or device, it will actually copy anything to anything: it's a bare-bones implementation of `cat`.
```c
/* cat:  minimal version */

#define SIZE 512  /* arbitrary */

int main() 
{
    char buf[SIZE];
    int n;

    while ((n = read(0, buf, sizeof buf)) > 0)
        write(1, buf, n);
    exit(0);
}
```
If the file size is not a multiple of `SIZE`, some `read` will return a smaller number of bytes to be written by `write`; the next call to `read` after that will return zero.

Reading and writing in chunks that match the disc will be most efficient, but even character-at-a-time I/O is feasible for modest amounts of data, because the kernel buffers your data; the main cost is the system calls.
`ed`, for example, uses one-byte reads to retrieve its standard input.
We timed this version of `cat` on a file of 54,000 bytes, for six values of `SIZE`:
```
TODO:
```
The disc block size is 512 bytes on the PDP-11 system and 1024 on the VAX.

It is quite legal for several processes to be accessing the same file at the same time; indeed, one process can be writing while another is reading.
If this isn't what you wanted, it can be disconcerting, but it's sometimes useful.
Even though one call to `read` returns `0` and thus signals the end of file, if more data is written on that file, a subsequent `read` will find more bytes available.
This observation is the basis of a program called `readslow`, which continues to read its input, regardless of whether it got an end of file or not.
`readslow` is handy for watching the progress of a program:
```
$ slowprog >temp &
5213
$ readslow <temp | grep something
```
In other words, a slow program produces output in a file; `readslow`, perhaps in collaboration with some other program, watches the data accumulate.

Structurally, `readslow` is identical to `cat` except that it loops instead of quitting when it encounters the current end of the input.
It has to use low-level I/O because the standard library routines continue to report `EOF` after the first end of file.
```c
/* readslow:  keep reading, waiting for more */

#define SIZE 512  /* arbitrary */

main() 
{
    char buf[SIZE];
    int n;

    for (;;) {
        while ((n = read(0, buf, sizeof buf)) > 0)
            write(1, buf, n);
        sleep(10);
    }
}
```

The function `sleep` causes the program to be suspended for the specified number of seconds; it is described in `sleep`(3).
We don't want `readslow` to bang away at the file continuously looking for more data; that would be too costly in CPU time.
Thus this version of `readslow` copies its input up to the end of file, sleeps a while, then tries again.
If more data arrives while it is asleep, it will be read by the next `read`.

#### File creation - `open`, `creat`, `close`, `unlink`

Other than the default standard input, output, and error files, you must explicitly open files in order to read or write them.
There are two system calls for this, `open` and `creat`.

`open` is rather line `fopen` in the previous chapter, except that instead of returning a file pointer, it returns a file descriptor, which is an `int`.
```c
char *name;
int fd, rwmode;

fd = open(name, rwmode);
```
As with `fopen`, the `name` argument is a character string containing the filename.
The access mode argument is different, however: `rwmode` is `0` for read, `1` for write, and `2` to open a file for both reading *and* writing. 
`open` returns `-1` if any error occurs; otherwise it returns a valid file descriptor.

It is an error to try to `open` a file that does not exist.
The system call `creat` is provided to create new files, or to rewrite o̷l̶d̸ ̵o̸n̷e̵s̵.
```c
int perms;

fd = creat(name, perms);
```
`creat` returns a file descriptor if it was able to create the file called `name`, and `-1` if not.
If the file does not exist, `creat` creates it with the *permissions* specified by the `perms` argument.
If the file already exists, `creat` will truncate it to zero length; it is not an error to `creat` a file that already exists.
(The permissions will not be changed.)
Regardless of `perms`, a `creat`ed file is open for writing.

As described in Chapter 2, there are nine bits of protection information associated with a file, controlling read, write, and execute permission, so a three-digit octal number is convenient for specifying them.
For example, `0755` specifies read, write, and execute permission for the owner, and read and execute permission for the group and everyone else.
Don't forget about the leading `0`, which is how octal numbers are specified in C.

To illustrate, here is a simplified version of `cp`.
The main simplification is that our version copies only one file, and does not permit the second argument to be a directory.
Another blemish is that our version does not preserve the permissions of the source file; we will show how to remedy this later.
```c
/* cp:  minimal version */

#include <stdio.h>
#define PERMS 0644  /* RW for owner, R for group, others */

char *progname;


int main(int argc, char *argv[]) 
{
    int f1, f2, n;
    char buf[BUFSIZ];
    progname = argv[0];

    if (argc != 3)
        error("Usage: %s from to", progname);
    if ((f1 = open(argv[1], 0)) == -1)
        error("can't open %s", argv[1]);
    if ((f2 = creat(argv[2], PERMS)) == -1)
        error("can't create %s", argv[2]);

    while ((n = read(f1, buf, BUFSIZ)) > 0)
        if (write(f2, buf, n) != n)
            error("write error", (char *) 0);

    return 0;
}
```
We will discuss `error` in the next subsection.

There is a limit (typically about 20; look for `NOFILE` in `<sys/param.h>`) on the number of files that a program may have open simultaneously.
Accordingly, any program that intends to process many files must be prepared to reuse file descriptors.
The system call `close` breaks the connection between a filename and a file descriptor, freeing the file descriptor for use with some other file.
Termination of a program via `exit` or return from the main program closes all open files.

The system call `unlink` removes a file from the file system.

#### Error processing - `errno`

The system calls discussed in this section, and in fact all system calls, can incur errors.
Usually they indicate an error by returning a value of `-1`.
Sometimes it is nice to know what specific error occurred; for this purpose all system calls, when appropriate, leave an error number in an external integer called `errno`.
(The meanings of the various error numbers are listed in the introduction to Section 2 of the *UNIX Programmer's Manual*).
By using `errno`, your program can, for example, determine whether an attempt to open a file failed because it did not exist or because you lacked permission to read it.
There is also an array of character strings `sys_errlist` indexed by `errno` that translates the numbers into a meaningful string.
Our version of `error` uses these data structures:
```c
/* print error message and die */
error(char *s1, *s2) 
{
    extern int errno, sys_nerr;
    extern char *sys_errlist[], *progname;

    if (progname)
        fprintf(stderr, "%s: ", progname);
    fprintf(stderr, s1, s2);
    if (errno > 0 && errno < sys_nerr)
        fprintf(stderr, " (%s)", sys_errlist[errno]);
    fprintf(stderr, "\n");
    exit(1);
}
```
`errno` is initially zero, and should always be less than `sys_nerr`.
It is not reset to zero when things go well, however, so you must reset it after each error if your program intends to continue.

Here is how error messages appear with this version of `cp`:
```
$ cp foo bar
cp: can't open foo (No such file or directory)
$ date >foo; chmod 0 foo
$ cp foo bar
cp: can't open foo (Permission denied)
$
```

#### Random access - `lseek`

File I/O is normally sequential: each `read` or `write` takes place in the file right after the previous one.
When necessary, however, a file can be read or written in an arbitrary order.
The system call `lseek` provides a way to move around in a file without actually reading or writing:
```c
int fd, origin;
long offset, pos, lseek();

pos = lseek(fd, offset, origin);
```
forces the current position in the file whose descriptor is `fd` to move to position `offset`, which is taken relative to the location specified by `origin`.
Subsequent reading or writing will begin at that position.
`origin` can be `0`, `1`, or `2` to specify that `offset` is to be measured from the beginning, from the current position, or from the end of the file.
The value returned is the new absolute position, or `-1` for an error.
For example, to append to a file, seek to the end before writing:
```c
lseek(fd, 0L, 1)
```
To get back to the beginning ("rewind"),
```c
lseek(fd, 0L, 0)
```
To determine the current position,
```c
pos = lseek(fd 0L, 1)
```
Notice the `0L` argument: the offset is a `long` integer.
(The `'l'` in `lseek` stands for 'long,' to distinguish it from the 6th Edition `seek` system call that used short integers.)

With `lseek`, it is possible to treat files more or less like large arrays, at the price of slower access.
For example, the following function reads any number of bytes from any place in a file.
```c
// read n bytes from position pos
get(int fd, long pos, char *buf, int n)
{
    if (lseek(fd, pos, 0) == -1)  // get to pos
      return -1;
    else
      return read(fd, buf, n);
}
```

### 7.2 File System: directories

The next topic is how to walk through the directory hierarchy.
This doesn't actually use any new system calls, just some old ones in a new context.
We will illustrate by writing a function called `spname` that tries to cope with misspelled filenames.
The function
```c
n = spname(name, newname);
```
searches for a file with a name "close enough" to *name*.
If one is found, it is copied into *newname*.
The value `n` returned by `spname` is `-1` if nothing close enough was found, `0` if there was an exact match, and `1` if a correction was made.

`spname` is a convenient addition to the `p` command: if you try to print a file but misspell the name, `p` can ask if you really meant something else:
```
$ p /urs/srx/ccmd/p/spnam.c        Horribly botched name
"/usr/src/cmd/p/spname.c"? y       Suggested correction accepted
/* spname:  return correctly spelled filename */
...
```
As we will write it, `spname` will try to correct, in each component of the filename, mismatches in which a single letter has been dropped or added, or a single letter is wrong, or a pair of letters is exchanged; all of these are illustrated above.
This is a boon for sloppy typists.

Before writing the code, a short review of file system structure is in order.
A directory is a file containing a list of file names and an indication of where they are located.
The "location" is actually an index into another table called the *inode table*.
The inode for a file is where all the information about the file except its name is kept.
A directory entry thus consists of only two items, an inode number and the file name.
The precise specification can be found in the file `<sys/dir.h>`:
```c
#define DIRSIZ 14 // max length of file name

// structure of directory entry
struct direct
{
    ino_t d_ino;  // inode number
    char d_name[DIRSIZ];  // file name
}
```
The "type" `ino_t` is a `typedef` describing the index into the inode table.
It happens to be `unsigned short` on PDP-11 and VAX versions of the system, but this is definitely not the sort of information to embed in a program: it might be different on a different machine.
Hence the `typedef`.
A complete set of "system" types is found in `<sys/types.h>`, which must be included before `<sys/dir.h>`.

The operation of `spname` is straightforward enough, although there are a lot of boundary conditions to get right.
Suppose the file name is `/d1/d2/f`.
The basic idea is to peel off the first component (`/`), then search that directory for a name close to the next component `(d1)`, then search that directory for something near `d2`, and so on, until a match has been found for each component.
If at any stage there isn't a plausible candidate in the directory, the search is abandoned.

We have divided the job into three functions.
`spname` itself isolates the components of the path and builds them into a "best match so far" filename.
It calls `mindist`, which searches a given directory for the file that is closest to the current guess, using a third function, `spdist`, to compute the distance between two names.
```c
TODO:
```

### 7.3 File System: inodes

In this section we will discuss system calls that deal with the file system and in particular with the information about files, such as size, dates, permissions, and so on.
These system calls allow you to get at all the information we talked about in Chapter 2.

Let's dig into the inode itself.
Part of the inode is described by a structure called `stat`, defined in `<sys/stat.h>`:
```c
// structure returned by stat
struct stat
{
    dev_t    st_dev;     // device of inode
    ino_t    st_ino;     // inode number
    short    st_mode;    // mode bits
    short    st_nlink;   // number of links to file
    short    st_uid;     // owner's userid
    short    st_guid;    // owner's group id
    dev_t    st_rdev;    // for special files
    off_t    st_size;    // file size in characters
    time_t   st_atime;   // time file last read
    time_t   st_mtime;   // time file last written or created
    time_t   st_ctime;   // time file or inode last changed
}
```
Most of the fields are explained by the comments.
Types like `dev_t` and `ino_t` are defined in `<sys/types.h>`, as discussed above.
The `st_mode` entry contains a set of flags describing the file; for convenience, the flag definitions are also part of the file `<sys/stat.h>`:
```c
#define S_IFMT    0170000  // type of file
#define S_IFDIR   0040000  // directory
#define S_IFCHR   0020000  // character special
#define S_IFBLK   0060000  // block special
#define S_IFREG   0100000  // regular
#define S_ISUID   0004000  // set user id on execution
#define S_ISGID   0002000  // set group id on execution
#define S_ISVTX   0001000  // save swapped text even after use
#define S_IREAD   0000400  // read permission, owner
#define S_IWRITE  0000200  // write permission, owner
#define S_IEXEC   0000100  // execute/search permission, owner
```

The inode for a file is accessed by a pair of system calls named `stat` and `fstat`.
`stat` takes a filename and returns inode information for that file (or `-1` if there is an error).
`fstat` does the same from a file descriptor for an open file (not from a `FILE` pointer).
That is,
```c
char *name;
int fd;
struct stat stbuf;

stat(name, &stbuf);
fstat(fd, &stbuf);
```
fills the structure `stbuf` with the inode information for the file `name` or file descriptor `fd`.

With all these facts in hand, we can start to write some useful code.
Let us begin with a C version of `checkmail`, a program that watches your mailbox.
If the file grows larger, `checkmail` prints `"You have mail"` and rings the bell.
(If the file gets shorter, that is presumably because you have just read and deleted some mail, and no message is wanted.)
This is entirely adequate as a first step; you can get fancier once this works.
```c
// checkmail:  watch user's mailbox

#include <stdio.h>
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/stat.h>

char *progname;
char *maildir = "/usr/spool/mail";  // system dependent

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {

    struct stat buf;
    char *name, *getlogin();
    int lastsize = 0;

    progname = argv[0];

    if ((name = getlogin()) == NULL)
        error("can't get login name", (char *) 0);
    if (chdir(maildir) == -1)
        error("can't cd to %s", maildir);
    for (;;) {
        if (stat(name, &buf) == -1)  // no mailbox
            buf.st_size = 0;
        if (buf.st_size > lastsize)
            fprintf(stderr, "\nYou have mail\007\n");
        lastsize = buf.st_size;
        sleep(60);
    }
    return 0;
}
```
The function `getlogin`(3) returns your login name, or `NULL` if it can't.
`checkmail` changes to the mail directory with the system call `chdir`, so that the subsequent `stat` calls will not have to search each directory from the root to the mail directory.
You might have to change `maildir` to be correct on your system.
We wrote `checkmail` to keep trying even if there is no mailbox, since most versions of `mail` remove the mailbox if it's empty.

We wrote this program in Chapter 5 in part to illustrate shell loops.
That version created several processes every time it looked at the mailbox, so it might be more of a system load than you want.
The C version is a single process that does a `stat` on the file every minute.
How much does it cost to have `checkmail` running in the background all the time?
We measured it at well under one second per hour, which is low enough that it hardly matters.

#### `sv`: An illustration of error handling

We are next going to write a program called `sv`, similar to `cp`, that will copy a set of files to a directory, but change each target file only if it does not exist or is older than the source.
`"sv"` stands for "save"; the idea is that `sv` will not overwrite something that appears to be more up to date.
`sv` uses more of the information in the inode than `checkmail` does.

The design we will use for `sv` is this:
```
$ sv file1 file2 ... dir
```
copies `file1` to `dir/file1`, `file2` to `dir/file2`, etc., except that when a target file is newer than its source file, no copy is made and a warning is printed.
To avoid making multiple copies of linked files, `sv` does not allow `/`'s in any of the source filenames.

### 7.4 Processes
#### Low-level process creation - `execlp` and `execvp`
#### Control of processes - `fork` and `wait`
### 7.5 Signals and Interrupts
#### Alarms
