## Chapter 9: Document Preparation

One of the first applications of the UNIX system was editing and formatting documents; indeed, Bell Labs management was persuaded to buy the first PDP-11 hardware by promises of a document preparation system, not an operating system.
(Fortunately, they got more than they bargained for.)

The first formatting program was called `roff`.
It was small, fast, and easy to work with, so long as one was producing simple documents on a line printer.
The next formatter, `nroff`, by Joe Ossanna, was much more ambitious.
Rather than trying to provide every style of document that users might ever want, Ossanna made `nroff`programmable, so that many formatting tasks were handled by programming in the `nroff` language.

When a small typesetter was acquired in 1973, `nroff` was extended to handle the multiple sizes and fonts and the richer character set that the typesetter provided.
The new program was called `troff` (which by analogy to "en-roff" is pronounced "tee-roff.")
`nroff` and `troff` are basically the same program, and accept the same input language; `nroff` ignores commands like size changes that it cant honor.
We will talk mainly about `troff` but most of our comments apply to `nroff` as well, subject to the limitations of output devices.

The great strength of `troff` is the flexibility of the basic language and its programmability - it can be made to do almost any formatting task.
But the flexibility comes at a high price - `troff` is often astonishingly hard to use.
It is fair to say that almost all of the UNIX document preparation software is designed to cover up some part of naked `troff`.

One example is page layout - the general style of a document, what the titles, headings, and paragraphs look like, where the page numbers appear, how big the pages are, and so on.
These are not built in; they have to be programmed.
Rather than forcing each user to specify all of these details in every document, however, a package of standard formatting commands is provided.
A user of the package does not say "the next line is to be centered, in bigger letters, and a bold font."
Instead, the user says "the next line is a title," and the packaged definition of the style of a title is used.
Users talk about the logical components of a document - titles, headings, paragraphs, footnotes, etc. - instead of sizes, fonts, and positions.

Unfortunately, what started out as a "standard" package of formatting commands is no longer standard: there are several packages in wide use, plus many local variants.
We'll talk about two general-purpose packages here: `ms`, the original "standard", and `mm`, a newer version that is standard in System V.
We'll also describe the `man` package for printing manual pages.

We'll concentrate on `ms` because it is standard in the 7th Edition, it exemplifies all such packages, and it is powerful enough to do the job: we used it to typeset this book.
But we did have to extend it a bit, for example, by adding a command to handle words `in this font` in the text.

This experience is typical - the macro packages are adequate for many formatting tasks, but it is sometimes necessary to revert to the underlying `troff` commands.
We will describe only a small part of `troff` here.

Although `troff` provides the ability to control output format completely, it's far too hard to use for complicated material like mathematics, tables, and figures.
Each of these areas is just as difficult as page layout.
The solution to these problems takes a different form, however.
Instead of packages of formatting commands, there are special=purpose languages for mathematics, tables, and figures that make it easy to describe what is wanted.
Each is handled by a separate program that translates its language into `troff` commands.
The programs communicate through pipes.

These preprocessors are good examples of the UNIX approach at work - rather than making `troff` even bigger and more complicated than it is, separate programs cooperate with it.
(Of course, the language development tools described in Chapter 8 have been used to help with the implementations.)
We will describe two programs: `tbl`, which formats tables, and `eqn`, which formats mathematical expressions.

We will also try to give hints about document preparation and the supporting tools.
Our examples throughout the chapter will be a document describing the `hoc` language of Chapter 8 and a `hoc` manual page.
The document is printed as Appendix 2.

### 9.1 The `ms` macro package

The crucial notion in the macro packages is that a document is described in terms of its logical parts - title, section headings, paragraphs - not by details of spacing, font, and sizes of letters.
This saves you from some very hard work, and insulates your document from irrelevant details; in fact, by using a different set of macro definitions with the same logical names, you can make your document appear quite different.
For example, a document might go through stages of technical report, conference paper, journal article and book chapter with the same formatting commands, but be formatted with four different macro packages.

Input to `troff`, whether or not a macro package is involved, is ordinary text interspersed with formatting commands.
There are two kinds of commands.
The first consists of a period at the beginning of a line, followed by one or two letters or digits, and perhaps by parameters, as illustrated here:
```groff
.PP
.ft B
This is a litttle bold font paragraph.
```
`troff` built-in commands all have lower-case names, so by convention commands in macro packages are given upper-case names.
In this example, `.PP` is the `ms` command for a paragraph, and `.ft B` is a `troff` command that causes a change to the **bold font**.
(Fonts have upper case names; the fonts available may be different on different typesetters.)

The second form of `troff` command is a sequence of characters that begins with a backslash `\`, and may appear anywhere in the input; for example, `\fB` also causes a switch to the bold font.
This form of command is pure `troff`; we'll come back to it shortly.

You can format with nothing more than `.PP` command before each paragraph, and for most documents, you can get by with about a dozen different `ms` commands.
For example, Appendix 2, which describes `hoc`, has a title, the authors' names, an abstract, automatically-numbered section headings, and paragraphs.
It uses only 14 distinct commands, several of which come in pairs.
The paper takes this general form in `ms`:
```groff
.TL
Title of document (one or more lines)
.AU
Author names, one per line
.AB
Abstract, terminated by .AE
.AE
.NH
Numbered heading (automatic numbering)
.PP
Paragraph...
.PP
Another paragraph...
.SH
Sub-heading (not numbered)
.PP
...
```
Formatting commands must occur at the beginning of a line.
Input between the commands is free form: the location of newlines in the input is unimportant, because `troff` moves words from line to line to make lines long enough (a process called *filling*), and spreads extra space uniformly between words to align the margins (*justification*).
It's good practice, however, to start each sentence on a new line; it makes subsequent editing easier.

Here is the beginning of the actual `hoc` document:
```groff
.TL
Hoc - An Interactive Language For Floating Point Arithmetic
.AU
Brian Kernighan
Rob Pike
.AB
.I Hoc
is a simple programmable interpreter
for floating point expressions.
It has C-style control flow,
function definition and the usual
numerical built-in functions
such as cosine and logarithm.
.AE
.NH
Expressions
.PP
.I Hoc
is an expression language,
much like C:
although there are several control-flow statements,
most statements such as assignments
are expressions whose value is disregarded.
...
```
The `.I` command italicizes its argument, or switches to italic if no argument is given.

If you use a macro package, it's specified as an argument to `troff`:
```
$ troff -ms hoc.ms
```
The characters after the `-m` determine the macro package.
When formatted with `ms`, the `hoc` paper looks like this:
TODO:

#### Displays

Although it is usually convenient that `troff` justifies text, sometimes that isn't desirable - programs, for example, shouldn't have their margins adjusted.
Such unformatted material is called display text.
The `ms` commands `.DS` (display start) and `.DE` (display end) demarcate text to be printed as it appears, indented without rearrangement.
Here is the next portion of the `hoc` manual, which includes a short display:
```groff
.PP
.I Hoc
is an expression language,
much like C:
although there are several control-flow statements,
most statements such as assignments
are expressions whose value is disregarded.
For example, the assignment operator
= assigns the value of its right operand
to its left operand, and yields the value,
so multiple assignments work.
The expression grammar is:
.DS
.I
expr:        number
        |    variable
        |    ( expr )
        |    expr binop expr
        |    unop expr
        |    function ( arguments )
.R
.DE
Numbers are floating point.
```
which prints as

TODO:

Text inside a display is not normally filled or justified.
Furthermore, if there is not enough room on the current page, the displayed material (and everything follows it) is moved onto the next page.
`.DS` permits several options, including `L` for left justified, `C`, which centers each line individually, and `B`, which centers the entire display.

The items in the display above are separated by tabs.
By default, `troff` tabs are set every half inch, not every eight spaces as is usual.
Even if tab stops were every 8 spaces, though, characters are of varying widths, so tabs processed by `troff` wouldn't always appear as expected.

#### Font changes

The `ms` macros provide three commands to change the font.
`.R` changes the font to roman, the usual font, `.I` changes to italic, *this font* and `.B` changes to boldface, **this font**.
Unadorned, each command selects the font for the subsequent text:
```groff
This text is roman, but
.I
this text is italic,
.R
this is roman again, and
.B
this is boldface.
```
appears like this:

> This text is roman, but *this text is italic*, this one is roman again, and **this is boldface**.

`.I` and `.B` take an optional argument, in which case the font change applies only to the argument.
In `troff`, arguments containing blanks must be quoted, although the only quoting character is the double quote `"`.
```groff
This is roman, but
.I this
is italic, and
.B "these words"
are bold.
```
is printed as

> This is roman, but *this* is italic, and **these words** are bold.

Finally, a second argument to `.I` or `.B` is printed in roman, appended without spaces to the first argument.
This feature is most commonly used to produce punctuation in the right font.
Compare the parenthesis of
```groff
(perenthetical
.I "italic words)"
```
which prints incorrectly as

> (parenthetical *italic words)*

with
```groff
(perenthetical
.I "italic words" )
```
which prints correctly as

> (parenthetical *italic words*)

Font distinctions are recognized by `nroff`, but the results aren't as pretty.
Italic characters are underlined, and there are no bold characters, although some versions of `nrogg` simulate bold by overstriking.

#### Miscellaneous commands

Footnotes are introduced with `.FS` and terminated with `.FE`.
You are responsible for any identifying mark like an asterisk or a dagger.
This footnote was created with
```groff
identifying mark like an asterisk or a datter.\(dg
.FS
\(dg Like this one.
.FE
This footnote was created with...
```

Indented paragraphs, perhaps with a number or other mark in the margin, are created with the `.IP` command.
To make this:
(1) First little paragraph.
(2) Second paragraph, which we make longer to show that it will be indented
    on the second line as well as the first.
Requires the input
```groff
.IP (1)
First little paragraph.
.IP (2)
Second paragraph, ...
```
A `.PP` or `.LP` (left-justified paragraph) terminates an `.IP`.
The `.IP` argument can be any string; use quotes to protect blanks if necessary.
A second argument can be used to specify the amount of indent.

The command pair `.KS` and `.KE` causes text to be kept together; text enclosed between these commands will be forced onto a new page if it won't all fit on the current page.
If `.KF` is used instead of `.KS`, the text will *float* past subsequent text to the top of the next page if necessary to keep it on one page.
We used `.KF` for all the tables in this book.

You can change most of `ms`'s default values by setting *number registers*, which are `troff` variables used by `ms`.
Perhaps the most common are the registers that control the size of text and the spacing between lines.
Normal text size (what you are reading now) is at "10 point," where a point is about 1/72 of an inch, a unit inherited from the printing industry.
Lines are normally printed at 12-point separation.
To change these, for example to 9 and 11 (as in our displays), set the number registers `PS` and `VS` with
```groff
.nr PS 9
.nr VS 11
```
Other number registers include `LL` for line length, `PI` for paragraph indent, and `PD` for the separation between paragraphs.
These take effect at the next `.PP` or `.LP`.

#### The `mm` macro package

We won't go into any detail on the `mm` macro package here, since it is in spirit and often in detail very similar to `ms`.
It provides more control of parameters than `ms` does, more capabilities (e.g., automatically numbered lists), and better error messages.
Table 9.2 shows the `mm` commands equivalent to the `ms` commands in Table 9.1.

| Command | Description                                                                                                             |
|---------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `.AB`   | start abstract; terminated by `.AE`                                                                                     |
| `.AU`   | author's name follows on next line; multiple `.AU`'s permitted                                                          |
| `.B`    | begin bold text, or embolden argument if supplied                                                                       |
| `.DS t` | start display (unfilled) text; terminated by `.DE` <br/> `t`: `L` (left-adjusted), `C` (centered), `B` (block-centered) |
| `.EQ s` | begin equation `s` (`eqn` input); terminated by `.EN`                                                                   |
| `.FS`   | start footnote; terminated by `.FE`                                                                                     |
| `.I`    | begin italic text, or italicized argument if supplied                                                                   |
| `.IP s` | indented paragraph, with `s` in margin                                                                                  |
| `.KF`   | keep text together, float to next page if necessary; end with `.KE`                                                     |
| `.KS`   | keep text together on page; end with `.KE`                                                                              |
| `.LP`   | new left-justified paragraph                                                                                            |
| `.NH n` | `n`-th level numbered heading; heading follows, up to `.PP` or `.LP`                                                    |
| `.PP`   | new paragraph                                                                                                           |
| `.R`    | return to roman font                                                                                                    |
| `.SH`   | sub-heading; heading follows, up to `.PP`                                                                               |
| `.TL`   | title follows, up to next `ms` command                                                                                  |
| `.TS`   | begin table (`tbl` input); terminated by `.TE`                                                                          |

| Macro        | Description |
|--------------|-------------|
| `.AS`        |             |
| `.AU`        |             |
| `.B`         |             |
| `.DF`        |             |
| `.DS`        |             |
| `.EQ`        |             |
| `.FS`        |             |
| `.I`         |             |
| `.H n "..."` |             |
| `.HU "..."`  |             |
| `.P`         |             |
| `.R`         |             |
| `.TL`        |             |
| `.TS`        |             |

### 9.2 The `troff` level

In real life, one sometimes has to go beyond the facilities of `ms`, `mm`, or other packages to get at some capability of bare `troff`.
Doing so is like programming in assembly language, however, so it should be done cautiously and reluctantly.

Three situations arise: access to special characters, in-line and font changes, and a few basic formatting functions.

#### Character names
#### Font and size changes
#### Basic `troff` commands
#### Defining macros
### 9.3 The `tbl` and `eqn` preprocessors
#### Tables
#### Mathematical expressions
#### Getting output
### 9.4 The manual page
### 9.5 Other document preparation tools
